Elucidating the Hidden Meaning

A Commentary on the Meaning of the Four Mudrās

by Dola Jigme Kalzang

It is like this:

1. Karma Mudrā

What we call the bhaga of the Vajra Queen of the Vast Expanse has the nature of the gateways
to liberation—emptiness, signlessness and wishlessness. This essence of the sugatas (sugatagarbha),
the ground continuum, which is the inconceivable dharmatā nature, the natural state
of pure awareness, is the karma mudrā, the basis of practice.

2. Dharma Mudrā

Arriving at a deep conviction that the condition of this ground—profound, peaceful, free from
complexity, the wisdom of uncompounded luminosity—does not exist as something separate from
the present moment of consciousness and actualizing all the qualities of the stages and
paths through the four levels of vidyādhara on the short path of the profound secret mantra
within a single lifetime, i.e., the path continuum, which is the abandonment and realization
of an ārya, is the dharma mudrā, the object of practice.

3. Samaya Mudrā

Not erring with respect to the means of easily accomplishing these two points or the special
circumstances, i.e., the general and particular points of what to adopt and avoid, such as
the special features of the three sets of vows connected with the guru's aural lineage of
profound instructions, is the samaya mudrā, the means of practice.

4. Mahāmudrā

Thus by first understanding well the underlying justification or basis of practice, and then
through applying the means of practice, the appropriate stages of samaya, the essence of
realization that is the object of practice is actualized. Then, the resultant continuum complete
with its twofold purity and free from complexity, the natural condition of suchness,
which is not existent as either ground or result and is the ultimate, primordial source
of liberation, is the mahāmudrā, the fruition of practice.

By the one called Zhönnu Lodrö. Sarva maṅgalam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2018.

Version: 1.2-20211019