Individual Selflessness

by Mipham Rinpoche

That which we label as the agent of our actions or the experiencer of happiness and suffering,
and which we assume to be the self, the individual, the agent and so on, is actually nothing
more than a presumption of selfhood, made on the basis of the five aggregates. When
we examine this with wisdom, we do not find any intrinsic ‘individual self’ either as identical
to, or distinct from, the aggregates.

If the self were identical to the aggregates, it would follow that, as there are different aggregates,
there must also be multiple selves. If the self were form—one of the aggregates—it
would follow that there must be as many selves as there are subtle particles. Similarly
for the other aggregates of feeling, perception, formations, and consciousness, since they
are all multiple by nature, logic dictates that the self would likewise be multiple. The
five aggregates arise from causes and do not remain for more than a single moment, so the
self too would be impermanent. In short, the aggregates, composed, as they are, of many
subtle particles and aspects of the shortest possible duration, are not the self.

If there were an independent self distinct from the five aggregates, it should be observable,
but since no such self can be observed, we must deny its existence. Were there a self transcending
the conditioned aggregates, it would not have the characteristics required to perform
actions or to experience happiness and suffering, and so on; rather, it would be unconditioned,
like space, beyond either benefit or harm.

The followers of the Vātsīputrīya school claim that there is a self, but that it cannot be described
in any way, either as identical to or distinct from the aggregates, either as permanent
or impermanent, and so on, but this too is illogical. When we analyze this position
rationally we can see that it is not possible for a thing which does not fall into either
of these categories to exist as something functional and real, because anything that really
exists must fall into one category or the other, and it is quite impossible that something
could exist as a functional entity yet avoid these two and belong to some third category.

Form, therefore, is not the self. Nor do form and the self have a relationship of possession,
with one belonging to the other. The self does not reside in form, and form does not reside
in the self. By applying the same principle to sensations and the other aggregates, we
arrive at a total of twenty—the so-called ‘twenty peaks of the mountain of belief in the
transitory collection’. Since these are all acquired beliefs based on a fundamental, instinctive
self-clinging, as soon as the belief in the transitory collection is shattered through
vajra-like wisdom, they will all be simultaneously destroyed.

Moreover, on this basis of the fundamental belief in the transitory collection, there are also
the sixty-two types of wrong view related to the past, present and future, which are mentioned
in the Sūtra of Brahmā’s Net. Then there are all the different suppositions about
the features of the self—that it is permanent, unitary, in control, pervasive, and so on.
There is also the belief that, just as we can infer the presence of a potter by seeing the
articles of his trade, such as the materials for a vase, the wheel and the stick, we can
infer the presence of the self by seeing all the things, such as bedding, food and clothing,
which cater to its needs. Then there is the supposed refutation of selflessness that says
that without a self all the exertions of the spiritual path would be meaningless, because
there would be no one to profit from them. All such statements by non-buddhist philosophers
who propound the existence of a self are entirely devoid of merit, because in the absence
of a self, it is inappropriate to speak of its features or its proofs.

If the self were permanent, there could not possibly be distinct occasions for performing an
action and experiencing [its result], or distinct occasions of happiness and suffering, elation
and depression, purity and impurity, and so on.

If the self were unitary, it could not be possibly have a variety of features.

If the self were independent and fully in control, it could not possibly be impermanent or subject
to even the slightest unwanted circumstance.

If the self were all-pervasive, it would be illogical for something possessing everything all
at once to experience ephemeral changes or distinctions, such as being separated from friends,
being self and other, performing virtuous and non-virtuous actions, and so on.

Given that the nature of the self is never observed through any validating cognition, we cannot
admit any evidence such as seeing things which supposedly bring about its benefit, just
as we can not speak of the clothes of a barren woman’s son.

The question might arise, “Are not bedding and such like taken for the sake of the self?” To
this, we must reply that even though the self does not exist, they are taken in order to
benefit the collection and continuation of the aggregates.

If the self existed, the path to liberation would be impossible, because any system that professes
belief in a self can not include a path for eliminating attachment to the self. If
our attachment to self is not eliminated, our attachment to ‘mine’ will ensure that we never
part from our clinging to the three realms, and it will therefore be impossible for us
to find a means to gain freedom from samsara.

There is liberation however for the proponents of selflessness, because they have turned away
from these forms of attachment, and without any rejecting or adopting, they can attain the
nirvāṇa that is free from attachment to the three realms. Securing benefit and avoiding
harm is not done because the self exists, but because we posit an agent or an experiencer
(and so on) on the basis of the continuity of aggregates, although they are themselves devoid
of such a self.

The label ‘chariot’, for example, is applied to a collection of parts. The chariot is not identical
to its wheels or other parts, yet nor is it completely separate from them. Therefore,
the parts and the possessor of these parts do not belong to one another. The possessor
of the parts does not reside within the parts, and the parts, such as the wheels and so on,
do not reside within the chariot that possesses them. The collection of parts and the shape
of this collection do not have the slightest existence in their own right, separate from
the parts themselves. When we analyze it in these seven ways, we can not observe any actual
chariot that is in possession of its parts. Instead, we find that it is merely a designation,
applied on the basis of its own components. When we analyze the self in the same
way, using these seven lines of reasoning to see how the self is designated on the basis
of the aggregates, we come to understand that it does not exist.

A sūtra says:[1]

Do you think, O Māra, that there is a "being"?You are under the spell of beliefs.These conditioned
aggregates are empty,And contain no living being.Just as a chariot is spoken ofIn reference
to a collection of parts,It is on the basis of the aggregates,That we speak conventionally
of ‘beings’.

Taken from Mipham Rinpoche’s Gateway to Learning (mkhas 'jug).

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2008, with reference to a preliminary translation by Erik Pema
Kunsang.

Version: 1.2-20220221


Khenpo Nüden’s commentary gives the source of this quotation as the Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra. For more
on these important verses of Sister Vajirā, which are also to be found in the Pāli Canon
and in several Mahāyāna sources, see Matthew Kapstein, Reason's Traces, Wisdom Publications,
2001, page 78 and passim.  ↩