Preliminary Points

To Be Explained When Teaching the Buddha's Word or the Treatises

by Patrul Rinpoche

Generally, for any kind of Dharma teaching, there is (I) an explanation of preliminary points
that precede the teaching and (II) the actual teaching of the topic to be explained.

I. The Preliminary Points to Be Explained

In this there are three parts:

How the teacher teachesHow the students listenHow both the teacher and students proceed while
teaching and listening.

1. How the Teacher Teaches

When the teacher is a fully enlightened buddha, he teaches through his three types of miraculous
ability. Through the miraculous ability of his magical form, he is able to attract disciples
who are not already included within the gathering and inspire devotion in those who
have gathered. Through the miraculous ability of his universally communicating mind, he
is able to teach the assembly precisely according to their mental receptivity and the keenness
of their faculties. Through the miraculous ability of his guiding speech, he teaches
in accordance with beings’ particular capacities, speaking with the voice of Brahmā in all
the various languages of the six classes of living beings.

Arhat teachers teach by means of three pure factors. Firstly there is the pure vessel of the
listener. This means that the arhats use their supernatural powers of cognition to examine
the students in the assembly before teaching the Dharma only to those whose mindstreams
are pure. Then there is the pure speech of the teacher. This means the arhats teach without
any afflictive emotion, in a pleasant style that is free from any verbal impediment or any
flaws in terms of grammar or syntax. Finally there is the pure topic of the teaching, which
means that the arhats teach exactly what they heard from their own teachers, the perfectly
enlightened buddhas. They do not add or omit even so much as a single word on account
of their infallible powers of recollection.

You might wonder why the great arhats do not teach the Dharma through the three types of miraculous
ability. Arhats are unable to teach using these three miraculous abilities because
they have four causes that prevent them from knowing certain things. They lack knowledge
about distant locations, as for example when Maudgalyāyana did not know that his mother had
been reborn in the buddha field called Possessing Light Rays. They also lack knowledge about
distant times, as when Śāriputra did not know that the householder Palkyé possessed the
seed of liberation. Nor do they know the infinity of results that spring from an infinite
number of causes. As it is said:

To know all the various causes that produce Just one of the bright colours in a peacock’s tail
Requires omniscience; such things are unknown To anything else besides all-knowing wisdom.


They lack knowledge of the Buddha’s many qualities; they do not know his ten powers, four fearlessnesses,
eighteen unshared attributes and so on.

When it comes to the teaching style of a learned paṇḍita, there are two approaches. The paṇḍitas
of the glorious monastic university of Nālanda would teach the Buddha’s words in terms
of the five perfections and the treatises by means of five principal considerations. The
paṇḍitas of the monastic university at Vikramaśīla would emply two themes: making their audience
suitably receptive and determining the origin of the teachings.[1]

If we now adopt the first approach [i.e. that of Nālanda] to explain a treatise such as The
Precious Wish-Fulfilling Treasury, then because it is not the direct word of the Buddha, we
must explain it by means of the five principal considerations, as follows:

Who then, one might wonder, is the text’s author? He is the omniscient lord of Dharma, Pal Ngakgi
Wangchuk [i.e. Longchenpa], who possesses all three qualifications of someone composing
a treatise—the highest qualification of seeing the truth of reality itself, the middling
qualification of gaining authorization from the yidam deity and the lowest qualification
of being well-versed in the five sciences—and who has crossed to the distant shore of the
ocean of our own and others’ philosophical views through his wisdom of study, reflection
and meditation.From which scriptures does the text draw? It draws from the three piṭakas
of the sūtrayāna and the four classes of tantra of the mantrayāna, together with their respective
commentaries.To which category does it belong? Generally, among the two vehicles,
i.e., the hīnayāna and mahāyāna, it belongs to the mahāyāna, and among the two categories
of sūtra mahāyāna and mantra mahāyāna, it belongs to the category of the unsurpassed mantra.What
is its basic theme from beginning to end? It shows the nature of saṃsāra, which is
to be abandoned, and the nature of nirvana, which is to be adopted.For whose benefit and for
what purpose was it composed? Generally, we could say that it was composed to set all beings,
infinite in number, on the path to liberation. More specifically it was written for
the sake of fortunate disciples, to lead them to the level of Lord Vajradhara within a single
lifetime and a single body through study, reflection and meditation and understanding
what in samsara and nirvana is to be abandoned and adopted.

Explaining the five principal considerations like this is necessary because it engenders confidence
in the authenticity of the teaching.

2. How the Students Listen

It is important to listen while avoiding the three defects of the container, the six stains
and the five wrong ways of remembering, and while relying on the four metaphors and applying
the six transcendent perfections.

As regards the three defects of the container, it is said:

Not paying attention is to be like a container turned upside down. Not remembering is to be
like a container with a hole in it. Mixing what you hear with mental afflictions is to be
like a container with poison inside.

These three should be avoided. As the sūtra says:

Listen well with full attention and remember what you hear.

The six stains are mentioned in Well Explained Reasoning:

Arrogance, lack of faith, Lack of any interest, Outward distraction, inward tension, And discouragement
are the six stains.

The five wrong ways of remembering are remembering the words but forgetting the meaning, remembering
the meaning but forgetting the words, remembering them both but with no understanding,
remembering them with a wrong understanding and remembering them in the wrong order.

The four metaphors are given in the Avataṃsaka Sūtra:

Noble one, think of yourself as someone who is sick, Of the Dharma as the remedy, Of your spiritual
teacher as a skilful doctor, And of diligent practice as the way to recovery.

The Tantra of the Clear Realization of Instructions on All Dharma Practices says:

Make perfect offerings such as flowers and cushions, Set the place in order and control your
behaviour, Avoid causing harm to any living creature, Offer prayers to your teacher, Listen
undistractedly to his instructions, And ask questions to clear away your doubts— These
are the six practices of Tārā.[2]

3. How Both the Teacher and Students Proceed While Teaching and Listening

Vasubandhu said:

Those who wish to teach the meaning of the sūtras, Should be given a few words of practical
advice. The practical instruction I refer to is as follows: Relate the teaching’s purpose
and its basic theme, The meaning of the words and how its parts fit together, And offer a
response to any possible objections.

As this states, every section of the teaching should be understood in terms of its purpose,
showing the reason why it is presented in a certain way, and also by means of a synopsis,
which is a summary of the most important points. It should also be understood through an accurate
explanation of the words of the text, including their grammatical features, as well
as its sequence, showing how the various earlier and later sections of the text fit together,
and by addressing any points of controversy or sources of doubt with a response to possible
objections. These are known as the five major structural themes.

One can also teach in any of the following three ways: dividing the text into sections, which
is likened to the leaping of a tigress; covering every word of the text, which is compared
to the slow crawl of a tortoise; or reviewing a section, which is likened to the majestic
posture of a lion.[3]

II. The Actual Teaching of the Topic to Be Explained

This has three sections: the virtuous beginning, the meaning of the introduction; the virtuous
middle, the meaning of the main part; and the virtuous end, the meaning of the conclusion.

The first of these has three parts: stating the title, the expression of homage and the commitment
to compose the text.

The explanation of the title consists of stating why a title is necessary and describing the
meaning of each of its words. With regard to the necessity of a title, firstly there is an
explanation of why all things in general are given names. As it is said:

If things were not given names, The world would be bewildered. So Lord Buddha, skilled in means,
Applies names to phenomena.

In particular, there is a purpose for giving names to treatises. Beings of the highest capacity
will realize the entire meaning of a text from beginning to end just by seeing its title,
in the same way that doctors can determine all the health problems in a patient’s body,
from head to toe, just by checking the pulse rate. Those of middling capacity will know
into which category a text falls, just like a badge on a soldier’s uniform. For people of
lesser capacity a title makes it easier to find a text, as with medicine containers, which
are given labels to indicate their contents.

Secondly, there is an explanation of the words of the title. This has three parts: explaining
the title in Sanskrit, explaining the title in Tibetan and explaining the meaning of the
title by showing the correspondence between the two languages. With regard to the first part,
there are various reasons why the title is given in Sanskrit. Generally, the Sanskrit
title is given at the beginning of the works that were translated by the lotsāwas and accomplished
Indian paṇḍitas during the earlier and later periods of transmission because it
inspires confidence in the authentic origin of the text. The Sanskrit title is also given
in treatises composed in Tibet to indicate that the teachings ultimately derive from India,
but also to show that the author is not ignorant when it comes to language, and to create
the auspicious conditions for teaching the Dharma to beings in their own languages, such
as Sanskrit (the language of the gods), once one ultimately attains awakening.

The explanation of the words of the title begins with “In the language of India…”

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2005. Updated 2021.