Putting the Instruction on the Purification of Mental Activity into Practice

by Mipham Rinpoche

Namo guru!

When putting the instruction on the purification of mental activity into practice remain in
solitude and adopt conduct that is conducive to concentration. Focus your mind on the difficulty
of obtaining the freedoms and advantages and so on as a means to inspire enthusiasm
for the meditation. Visualize the Blessed Teacher, King of the Śākyas, on the crown of your
head surrounded by the saṅgha of the greater and lesser vehicles. Perform the seven-branch
offering (ji nyé su dak…etc.),[1] and make the following prayer with fervent and heartfelt
devotion: “Inspire me with your blessings, so that the stages of the practice for purifying
mental activity arise in my own mind and the minds of all sentient beings here and
now, while I remain upon this very seat!” Generate bodhicitta by thinking, “I will attain
the level of perfect enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings. And it is for this
reason that I now meditate on the stages of purifying mental activity.”

Multiplicity

To begin, imagine that someone to whom you feel attached, or the object of your practice, whoever
that might be, appears before you. Then consider that they are dissected like a corpse
in a charnel ground, beginning at the right eye socket and continuing with the skin, flesh,
bones, and internal organs. Consider the smell and other features of each part as it
is dissected. Continue the process, mentally dissecting each of the thirty-six impure substances
right down to the level of the subtlest particles, and develop a deep understanding
of the inherent flaws of the physical body. Then, in the same way, divide the flesh and bones
of the body according to their elemental components: solidity as the earth element; warmth
as the fire element; breath as the wind element; blood, urine and so on as the water
element; and cavities as the space element. These elements with their different characteristics
are combined and contained within the body like a mass of poisonous snakes. Direct
the eye of your intelligence to the body’s hollowness or mask-like character. The pace and
duration of the session are not predetermined; meditate until everything arises clearly in
your mind.

The sūtras say that when grains such as rice, barley and corn are placed together in a pile,
a skilled person may separate them by identifying what is rice, what is barley and so on;
and in the same way, by dividing the constituents of the aggregates and analyzing each one
in turn it is possible to understand how they are a multiplicity. First, consider form in
the way described. Then, when you have gone through the contemplation once clearly in this
way, consider sensations, which are divided into pleasant, painful and neutral. Even pleasant
sensations have further subdivisions, according to whether they arise from seeing a
pleasant form, hearing a pleasant sound, and so on. Analyze and dissect these sensations
according to their multiplicity. Then, afterwards, consider perceptions. There are various
forms of perception, including good, bad and neutral, as well as all the various forms of
perception classified according to their particular object—be it a pillar, vase, horse, ox,
man, woman, or whatever. Develop conviction that the aggregate of perception, too, includes
a multiplicity of phenomena, given that there are so many different forms of perception.
After this, consider what is known as the aggregate of conditioning factors. Since conditioning
factors associated with mind include the various mental events—with the exception
of sensation and perception—such as attention and contact, they too are a multiplicity.
For example, there are several virtuous mental states, including faith and conscientiousness.
There are also several different forms of nonvirtuous mental state, such as lack of faith
and lack of conscientiousness, as well as attachment and aversion, and so on. Even within
a single mind of attachment or non-attachment there are particularities of object, time
and features, so that the subdivisions are beyond limit. Conditioning factors thus consist
of a multiplicity of various phenomena. Consider then how there are six types of consciousness,
from visual consciousness through to mental consciousness, and how each has its own
subdivisions. Visual consciousness, for example, includes the apprehension of blue, the
apprehension of yellow, and so on. Analyze clearly how these constitute a multiplicity of
different types.

A sūtra says:

Form is like a mass of foam,Sensations are like bubbles on water,Perception is like a mirage,Formations
are like a plantain tree,And consciousness is like an illusion.So says the Kinsman
of the Sun.

When you develop a special certainty that this is how things are, rest in that state without
becoming subject to forgetfulness for as long as you can. When the impression fades, rather
than seeking to prolong it, turn instead to the contemplation of impermanence.

Impermanence

All entities, once they have come into being, do not remain as they are in the second instant
but undergo immediate change. From the very first moment they arise until their final moment
of cessation, they are subject to a continuous process of transformation. It does not
matter whether something is like lightning, which disappears in a single instant, or the
outer world, which endures for an aeon, as long as it is conditioned it will pass through
a succession of moments during which it arises and ceases anew. Settle in the understanding
that everything is similar to a waterfall or the flame of a lamp. Meditate on how all worlds—environment
and inhabitants alike—are formed and ultimately perish, on the passing of
the four seasons in the external world, and on the phases of life and changes in circumstances—youth
and old age, high and low status, happiness and sorrow—that beings must pass through.
Consider your own experience and what you have witnessed and heard concerning others.
Meditate in these various ways until you develop clear certainty that all conditioned
things resemble flashes of lightning, bubbles on water, or clouds.

Suffering

When the momentum of this notion fades, investigate once more these tainted aggregates, the
assemblies of various elements in constant flux, which never remain static even for an instant.
Consider how, leaving aside their continuity and the coarser level of appearance, even
in each passing moment, experiences of pain constitute the suffering of suffering, whereas
moments that seem to have the nature of happiness are still liable to cease at any time
and thus, being part of a constantly evolving stream, constitute the suffering of change.
No matter whether you experience happiness, suffering or equanimity in the present moment,
still, it is as if you had eaten poisonous food: there is not a single moment of experience
that will not become a cause of future suffering. It is on the basis of earlier moments
that subsequent moments arise; if previous moments were somehow incomplete this would obstruct
the arising of their effects. All moments therefore function as causes for future
suffering and thus constitute the suffering of conditioning.

Reflect on how the defiled aggregates included within the three realms relate to these three
types of suffering until you are certain that the aggregates are the basis for suffering
and similar to a pit of fire or filthy swamp. In addition, contemplate the individual sufferings
of the six classes of beings, such as the intense heat and cold of the hells, and all
the aspects of suffering you have seen or heard about, including the pain you have experienced
directly. The sequence and duration of the reflection are not predetermined. You should
simply reflect as much as you can on all the various major and minor forms of suffering
within existence. Recognise that these different forms of suffering, which are so difficult
to bear, will continue to arise, again and again without end, until the noble path is
reached. Recognise too that they all emerge from the stream of tainted aggregates that are
the basis of grasping. Continue this reflection until a recognition of their inherent faults
arises from deep within and you develop certain conviction.

Selflessness

Remain in the state of mind that this certainty induces for as long as it has momentum. Then,
when the force of the notion begins to fade, consider these five conditioned aggregates,
which, through the certainty that the three investigations carried out so far has elicited,
are now understood to be impermanent, multiple and painful by nature. Although we presume
that these aggregates constitute a person or a self in relation to which we think, “I am,”
they have no such inherently existent self, person or “I” whatsoever. Reflect on this,
and consider how you would recognise the absence of a snake in a mottled rope in plain sight,
and how the eyes of intelligence may similarly perceive the absence of a self in what
are merely aggregates composed of assembled particles and successive moments, labelled as
a self only where there is no investigation or analysis.

Generally speaking, selflessness is the most important point to realise. Still, this does not
mean that it should be the exclusive focus, since emphasising the three preceding investigations
makes it easier to understand the final one; that is to say, the momentum that they
bring removes some of the difficulty. Here too, you should meditate until certainty concerning
selflessness fades. When other thoughts begin to stir do not fall prey to their influence
but carry out the analysis once again, beginning with the multiplicity of the aggregates.
Meditate by focusing on each stage in turn and ensuring that you reach a decisive
understanding of every point. Sometimes investigate your own aggregates, sometimes analyse
the aggregates of others, and sometimes consider conditioned phenomena in general. Practise
whichever of these three forms of analysis you prefer.

Dedicate the virtue at the end of the session and then rest in natural ease. If you are practising
in multiple sessions, try to keep the wheel of analysis turning without interruption,
like wildfire spreading through grass, so that there is no opportunity for other superficial
thoughts to intervene. Should you grow mentally tired or fatigued, allow yourself simply
to relax without contemplating anything at all. If thoughts stir, think to yourself:
“What is the point of trivial preoccupations? I shall steer any movement of mind towards this
most appropriate form of mental activity.” By doing so repeatedly you will arrive at a
point where deliberate focus effortlessly induces an intensely powerful conviction and allowing
the mind to settle during breaks between sessions causes the points of the contemplation
to course spontaneously through your mind, bringing great benefit. These stages of meditation
based on the sūtras are easy for anyone to understand, irrespective of their level
of intelligence. They bring vast benefit without the need for exhaustive reasoning and
make it possible, once the practice has become familiar, to realize the key to all dharmas.
Thus:

Teaching is not paramount, meditation is.When meditating don’t teach but learn deeply.To teach
without meditating is to be like a parrot.Practise, therefore, this analytical meditation.


As requested by Pema Gyaltsen,Who provided the paper on which to write,I, Mipham, wrote down
conciselyWhatever came to mind during a tea-break.

Maṅgalam.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2021.