The Wheel of Analytical Meditation That Thoroughly Purifies Mental Activity

by Mipham Rinpoche

Namo mañjuśrīye![1]

Whatever problems there are in the worldAre created by the afflictions in our own minds.A mistaken
attitude is a cause for the kleśas,Yet the pattern of our thoughts can be refined.


Here there are three sections: 1) how to meditate, 2) the measure ofprogress, and 3) the significance
of the practice.

1. How to Meditate

Multiplicity

Imagine someone who stirs in you intense attachment,And consider them now present vividly before
you.Separate this person into five component skandhas,And begin by investigating the
physical body.

Consider all its impure substancesOf flesh and blood, bones, marrow, fat,Internal organs, limbs
and organs of sense,Faeces, urine, bacteria, hair, nails and the like,And the components
of earth and other elements.

Think of all these aspects, each of whichCan still be divided even further, and then,Down to
the very tiniest particle,Mentally dissect them all stage by stage,Checking whether you feel
desire for each in turn.

Since there is nothing we could call “body”Apart from these substances, varied and impure,A
body is just like an unclean contraption,A field of grass, wall of bricks, mound of waste,Or
a mass of bubbling foam.

Seeing this fact, sit and consider it mindfully.Once the momentum of this insight fades,Turn
to feelings, perceptions, formations and consciousness,And look into their nature,By dividing
them into their various aspects.

When you see them as insubstantial like bubbles,A mirage, a plantain tree or a magical illusion,You
will understand how in these too there is nothingTo which one could ever be attached.Continue
with this thought until it fades.Then, once it does, do not try to prolong it,But
turn instead to another investigation.

Impermanence

Reflect deeply on how these aggregates,Which are impure and lack real essence,Do not remain
once they have arisen,But perish from one moment to the next.

All the civilizations and societies of the past,Met with only destruction in the end,And so
will those of today and ages yet to come.The nature of the conditioned can inspire disenchantment.


Death is certain for all living things,Suddenly it comes, and without warning.Reflect on how
all that we experience in lifeIs changing from one moment to the next.

In summary, to the best of your ability,Consider all the aspects of impermanenceThat characterize
conditioned things.Reflect on each in turn with lucid thoughts.

Recognize how the aggregates of those that we desire,Are transient as lightning, evanescent
like bubbles,And fleeting like clouds in the sky.Until the momentum of this idea fades,Focus
your attention on nothing else.

Suffering

Then consider how within each of the aggregates,Which are momentary and consist of many aspects,There
are experiences we might describe as pain itself,And those that seem pleasant until
they change.

Yet they all provide the cause for future woes,And thus the skandhas are the basis of suffering.Reflect
as well, as much as you are able,On all the misery there is within the world.


All is due to the skandhas’ imperfections.There is not the tiniest speck or pin-tip’s worthOf
these contaminated aggregatesThat is free from the defect of suffering.

As they are the source of suffering,The skandhas are likened to a filthy swamp,A pit of burning
coals or an island of demons.Remain with this insight for as long as you can.

Selflessness

Finally, investigate these aggregates,Which have many aspects and are impermanent,And whose
suffering nature has now been shown,And look for what it is that we call “I.”

When you see that, like a waterfall,A shower of rain or an empty house,They are devoid of any
intrinsic self,Remain until this conviction fades.

When it does disappear, then once againInvestigate in the stages as they have been shown.Sometimes
contemplate in no particular sequence,Or else investigate a variety of things.

Practise investigating these points again and again,Sometimes considering another’s aggregates,Sometimes
looking into your own,And at times, analyzing all that is conditioned.Let your
attachment to anything be undermined.

In short, renounce any thought that does notInvolve an investigation of these four points,[2]And
turn the wheel of analysis again and again.The more you analyze, the more your certainty
will grow.

Apply therefore a clear mind of intelligenceTo all kinds of observations just like these,And,
like wildfire spreading across a grassy plain,Practise continually without interruption.


Say to yourself: “In the past, I would alwaysGet caught in my mistaken ideas and attitudes,Which
led to all kinds of useless speculation,But now I will consider only this instead.”

If you find yourself getting tired,Yet notice that the afflictions still do not arise,Even without
your applying the antidote,Then rest in equanimity to refresh your mind.

After a while, once your tiredness is no more,Repeat the investigation just like before,At all
times being mindful and awareOf the insight the investigation brings.

If, at times, you slip into forgetfulness,And the afflictions have occasion to arise,Then take
up this investigation once more,Like reaching for a weapon when enemies appear.

Just as light will banish darkness,It is almost needless to say thatA precise investigation
such as this,Even if it is only practised a little,Will do great harm to the kleśas.

However much one understands the flawsOf this conditioned saṃsāric world,One will also understand
the unconditioned,Nirvāṇa’s supreme and refreshing peace.

2. The Measure of Progress

Eventually, through familiarity with this practice,You will naturally appreciate how everythingIncluded
within the five skandhas and the conditionedIs manifold, impermanent, painful
and devoid of self.

Even without any deliberate effort,The whole of your experienceWill seem magical and insubstantial,And
you will overcome the kleśas.

When it is free from the waves of the afflictive emotions,The ocean of your mind is made serene
and calm.This is conducive to gaining mental self-control,Through which one reaches the
samādhi of calm abiding.

If you can then look into the very identityOf the mind in one-pointed concentration,That is
the extraordinary insight of vipaśyanā.

It is here that one finds the initial entry point
That is common to all three vehicles.

3. The Significance of the Practice

All illusory phenomena which arise interdependently,Have never arisen since the very dawn of
time,And so in emptiness—the lack of phenomenal identity—They are beyond extremes such as
sameness or difference.

This absolute space of great indivisible equality,Is also known as the essence of the sugatas.Once
it is realized, one finds the great nirvāṇaThat abides in neither existence nor quiescence.


This is supremely pure and blissful,The great unconditioned, totally permanent,The great self-identity—these
are itsTranscendent and unsurpassable qualities.

This is the theme of the highest secret essence tantras,The all-pervading space of ultimate
co-emergent bliss,It is also referred to as ‘naturally arising wisdom',A state in which all
phenomena have total perfection.To introduce this directly through the master’sPith instructions
is the approach of the Great Perfection.

Therefore, as a preliminary trainingFor the mahāyāna path of both sūtra and mantra,Breaking
through the shell of confusion surrounding the conditioned,This path of precise investigation
is excellent indeed.

First, through the power of fine analysis,One destroys the marks of rising afflictions.Then
through confidence in the emptiness of the aggregates,One lets go of desires and hopes based
on the three realms,And eventually, by progressing in stages, all conceptual notionsAre
pacified completely within the state of emptiness.

Not wishing for any antidotes or further relinquishing,One is freed entirely from attachment
and clinging to extremes.With the purest compassion beyond attachment,One courses through
existence without the slightest fear,Like a bird soaring through absolute space,And attains
the level of a supreme bodhisattva.

Based on the texts of noble masters, I have here explainedThe important points of the paths
of the three vehicles,Which provide a thorough purification of mental activity,As a preliminary
to the paths of śamatha and vipaśyanā.

The more familiar you become with this practiceOf thoroughly purifying activities of the mind,The
more the afflictions will diminish,And the subtler the kleśas will become.

This will make it easier to practise śamatha,And just like gold that is treated in fireSo it
becomes malleable and ready to craft,Mind will be refined once it is freed from attachment.


Imagine if someone were to offer plentiful giftsTo the Three Jewels for a thousand godly years.It
is said in the sūtras that the merit of this generosityIs surpassed by the merit of
even a moment’s reflectionOn impermanence, emptiness and selflessness.

This is because the teachings say thatTo recite the Four Seals of the Mahāyāna DharmaIs equivalent
to understanding the teachingsIn the eighty-four thousand sections of the Dharma.

If you meditate well on the points explained here,Since they bring together the key points of
many thousands of sūtras,You will easily gain the treasure of knowing perfectly the profound
and vast,And liberation will swiftly follow in its wake.

By the virtue of this explanation, may all beingsTormented by the troubles of this degenerate
age,Meet this elixir-like teaching on non-attachment,And, through its power, reach a state
of perfect peace.

This was written by Mipham Nampar Gyalwa in the Iron Hare year [1891] on the18th day of the
tenth month.

Maṅgalam!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2004, based on a version prepared by Garth Copenhaver and Adam
Pearcey in 2002 through the kindness of Ringu Tulku Rinpoche. Translation revised October
2006. Thanks to Cortland Dahl of the Rimé Foundation for providing further clarifications
based on the commentary of Khenpo Sherab Sangpo. Further revised with the kind assistance
of Khenpo Sonam Tsewang, 2021.